2019 was supposed to be the year of no bezels in phone technology. We have already seen phone makers offering 95% screen to body ratio, which is a torrential upgrade from the 70 % provided by Apple as little as 1.5 years ago. One of the revolutions that have made all this possible is the Technology of Under the display fingerprint scanners.
While some makers have moved to facial recognition and thus eliminated fingerprint scanners. The facial recognition comes with a host of other riders. It is dependent on the ideal lighting, Gets confused with makeup, caps, and spectacles. Facial recognition solutions can easily be fooled by silicone masks and 3D projections of the face. If you have a mischievous identical twin, then you will surely stay miles away from face ID. Moreover, Bank software do not trust Facial recognition as much as they believe fingerprint scanners or retinal scanners. Although it might be suitable for making speaking shit-emoji that look like you, it seems facial recognition has a long way to go before it can completely replace the faithful fingerprint scanners.
Let us delve a bit into the history of fingerprint scanners. The first-ever fingerprint scanners were Optical reflexive that is the kind you see in biometric attendance systems in your workplace or college. These were expensive and bulky for they used red light to be refracted off a prism and then used to image the subject’s thumb.
The first fingerprint scanners to be incorporated in smartphones in the 2010s were capacitive. The capacitive sensor is a silicon integrated circuit with a surface that is covered by a large number of transducer elements (or pixels), with a typical resolution of 500 dpi. Each element contains two adjacent metal electrodes. The capacity between the electrodes, which forms a feedback path for an inverting amplifier, is reduced when the finger is applied to the said surface: it is further reduced when it detects ridges and less reduced when it detects the space between them. But since these sensors require direct contact with the finger, these cannot be used under the display.
When Vivo Nex first implemented under display fingerprint scanners, they used optical scanners — these use some light to illuminate your finger. A tiny camera under the screen takes an image of your finger, which is then compared to the stored image. This technology though it can be used under OLED displays, is expensive and leaves a differentially colored speck on display and thus reduce its quality.

Image Credit: The Verge
In an aim to make the flawless In display fingerprint scanners back in 2013, Qualcomm acquired a company called Ultra-Scan, a small company with “outstanding IP for ultrasonic waveform” and with a background in producing ultrasonic readers for the US Government.
Qualcomm then used their technology to implement under display fingerprint recognition with their advanced chipsets in a concept device. Ultrasonic fingerprint readers are more accurate than their optical counterparts and more secure because of the 3D impression that the reader creates of your finger. It’s not just an image as with optical. It’s theoretically possible that you could fool an optical sensor with an image of a fingerprint. So today most of the fingerprint scanners you see under your display will be ultrasonic.
It seems checkmate for the old optical sensors. Newly-made ultrasonic sensors by Synaptics Current ultrasonics can penetrate through glass (up to 800 µm or microns thick) and metal (up to 400 µm). Synaptics has been closely following Qualcomm in their progress and has also made significant progress with ultrasonic sensors. Synaptics has provided sensors for Xiaomi Mi 8 Pro and even for Vivo’s newer models.
While most fingerprint scanners are based on very similar hardware principles, additional components and software can also play a significant part in differentiating how products perform and what features are available to us.
Typically these algorithms look for where ridges they split in two. Such distinctive features are called minutiae. If a scanned fingerprint matches several of these minutiae, then it will be considered a match.
Rather than comparing the whole fingerprint each time, comparing minutiae reduces the amount of processing power required to identify each fingerprint, helps avoid errors if the scanned fingerprint is smudged, and also allows the finger to placed off-center or be identified with only a partial print.
To prevent the fingerprint data from being compromised, it is not uploaded on the cloud. It is kept on device in a cryptographically secured space. The secured folder directly communicates with the hardware using the dedicated IC of the sensor. This prevents it from being accessed from any third party software.
So let me end the history lesson here. I hope it wasn’t as boring as high school. Let’s wait for the day when such history lessons are taught instead of the Mughal lineage in high school!